.\"
.\" $Id: htop.1,v 1.2 2003/11/18 10:54:42 vflegel Exp $
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics <pftools@sib.swiss>
.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii <name>
.\" for ascii output or
.\" groff -man -Tps <name>
.\" for postscript output
.\"
.TH HTOP 1 "May 2003" "pftools 2.3" "pftools"
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Name section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH NAME
htop \- convert a
.SM HMMER
ASCII-formatted HMM into an equivalent
.SM PROSITE
profile  
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Synopsis section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH SYNOPSIS
.TP 10
.B htop
[
.B \-fhilos
] [
.B \-B
.I norm_logbase
] [
.B \-C
.I cut_off
] [
.B \-F
.I multiplier
] [
.B \-H
.I init/term_score
] [
.B \-L
.I score_logbase
] [
.B \-M
.I nb_unprotect
] [
.B \-P
.I percent_unprotect
] [
.B \-Q
.I odds_ratio
]
.I hmm_file
|
.B \-
[
.I random_model
] [
.I parameters
]
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Description section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B htop
converts a hidden Markov model (HMM) into an equivalent
.SM PROSITE
formatted generalized profile. The input
.I hmm_file
is a nucleic acid or protein HMM in
.SM HMMER
ASCII-format. The
.I random_model
file contains a simple null-model in the format used by the HMM search programs
of the
.SM HMMER1
package.
This random model is only effective in conjunction with the 
.B \-o
option (old
.SM HMMER1 
format). If omitted, a random model consisting of the 
average residue probabilities of the insert states will be used.
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Options section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH OPTIONS 
.\" --- hmm_file ---
.TP
.I hmm_file
Input HMM ASCII-file. By default,
.B htop
expects a
.SM HMMER2
formatted HMM. If the option
.B \-o
is set, the file should be in
.SM HMMER1
ASCII format.
If the filename is replaced by a
.RB ' \- ',
.B htop
will read the input HMM from
.BR stdin .
.\" --- random_model ---
.TP
.I random_model
Input random model file. Only used in conjunction with
.SM HMMER1
HMMs (see option
.BR \-o ).
This file should contain a simple null-model using the same residue alphabet as
the
.IR hmm_file .
.\" --- f ---
.TP
.B \-f
Emulate HMM fragment search (only effective with old
.SM HMMER1
format).
When given as input to the
.B pftools
programs
.BR pfsearch (1) 
or
.BR pfscan (1),
the resulting profile will behave like the original HMM searched with 
the 
.SM HMMER1
program 
.BR hmmfs . 
The default mode is to emulate HMM local search implemented in the
.SM HMMER1
program 
.BR hmmls . 
.\" --- h ---
.TP
.B \-h
Display usage help text.
.\" --- i ---
.TP
.B \-i
Force all insert extension scores to be zero.
.\" --- l ---
.TP
.B \-l
Remove output line length limit. Individual lines of the output profile
can exceed a length of 132 characters, removing the need to wrap them over several lines. 
.\" --- o ---
.TP
.B \-o
Assume input to be in old
.SM HMMER1
ASCII format. Since version 2.2, the
.B pftools
assume by default the
.SM HMMER2
format. 
.\" --- s ---
.TP
.B \-s
Implement semiglobal alignment mode. This option forces all external
initiation scores to be identical to the internal initiation
score at the beginning of the profile. Likewise, the external 
termination scores are set to the value of the internal
termination score at the end of the profile.
.\" --- B ---
.TP
.BI \-B\  norm_logbase
Logarithmic base to be used for normalization of profile
match scores (only effective with old
.SM HMMER1
format).
.br
Default: 2.0
.\" --- C ---
.TP
.BI \-C\  cut_off
Level zero cut-off value in normalized score units.
.br
Default: 8.5 (or 0.0 in conjunction with option 
.BR \-o )
.\" --- F ---
.TP
.BI \-F\  multiplier
Output score multiplier. On output, all profile scores are multiplied by
this factor and rounded to the nearest integers.
.br
Only effective with
.SM HMMER2
format.
.br
Default: 100
.\" --- H ---
.TP
.BI \-H\  init/term_score
High-cost initiation/termination score (only effective in conjunction with 
.B \-s
option). This score will be applied to
all external and internal initiation and termination scores
at path matrix positions where
initiation or termination at low cost is not possible according to semiglobal
alignment mode.
.br
Default: * (low-value)
.\" --- L ---
.TP
.BI \-L\  score_logbase
Logarithmic base to be used for representation of profile
scores (only effective in conjunction with old
.SM HMMER1
format).
.br
Default: 1.0233739 (1/30 bit units)
.\" --- M ---
.TP
.BI \-M\  nb_unprotect
Maximal number of unprotected residues at the ends of the profile.
.br
Type: integer
.br
Default: 5 (meaning that the protected region starts at position 6).
.\" --- P ---
.TP
.BI \-P\  percent_unprotect
Percent profile-length at the ends of the profile,
which will not be included in the protected area.
.br
Type: real
.br
Default: 0 (range 0 to 100)
.\" --- Q ---
.TP
.BI \-Q\  odds_ratio
Position-independent odds ratio assumed for unknown residues.
This parameter determines 
the default values for profile scores
.I M0
and 
.IR I0 .
Note that the 
.I I0
scores may be over-written by the
.B \-i   
option.
.br
Default: 0.8
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Parameters section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH PARAMETERS 
.TP
Note:
for backwards compatibility, release 2.3 of the
.B pftools
package will parse the version 2.2 style parameters, but these are
.I deprecated
and the corresponding option (refer to the
.I options
section) should be used instead.
.TP
B=#
Match score logarithmic base.
.br
Use option
.B \-B
instead.
.TP
C=#
Level zero cut-off.
.br
Use option
.B \-C
instead.
.TP
F=#
Output score multiplier.
.br
Use option
.B \-F
instead.
.TP
H=#
High-cost init/term score.
.br
Use option
.B \-H
instead.
.TP
L=#
Profile scores logarithmic base.
.br
Use option
.B \-L
instead.
.TP
M=#
Maximal number of unprotected residues.
.br
Use option
.B \-M
instead.
.TP
P=#
Percentage of unprotected residues.
.br
Use option
.B \-P
instead.
.TP
Q=#
Unknown residues odds ratio.
.br
Use option
.B \-Q
instead.
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Examples section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
(1)
.B htop 
pfam_sh3.hmm > pfam_sh3.prf
.IP
Converts the
.SM HHMER2
formatted SH3 domain profile
.RI ' pfam_sh3.hmm '
into a generalized
.SM PROSITE
profile. 
After this conversion, the following two commands:
.IP
.B hmmsearch 
\--null2  pfam_sh3.hmm sh3.seq 
.br
.B pfsearch
\-fy -C 5.0 pfam_sh3.prf sh3.seq
.IP
should produce equivalent results in terms of raw scores
and profile-sequence alignments (E-values and normalized scores
will usually be different). Note that the program 
.B hmmsearch
is from Sean Eddy's
.SM HMMER2
package
.RI ( http://hmmer.wustl.edu/ ).
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Exit code section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH EXIT CODE
.LP
On successful completion of its task,
.B htop
will return an exit code of 0. If an error occurs, a diagnostic message will be
output on standard error and the exit code will be different from 0. When conflicting
options where passed to the program but the task could nevertheless be completed, warnings
will be issued on standard error.
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" See also section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR pfsearch (1),
.SM HMMER
documentation
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Author section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH AUTHOR
The
.B pftools
package was developed by Philipp Bucher.
.br
Any comments or suggestions should be addressed to <pftools@sib.swiss>.
