.\"
.\" $Id: pfmake.1,v 1.2 2003/08/11 12:09:14 vflegel Exp $
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics <pftools@sib.swiss>
.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii <name>
.\" for ascii output or
.\" groff -man -Tps <name>
.\" for postscript output
.\"
.TH PFMAKE 1 "August 2003" "pftools 2.3" "pftools"
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Name section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH NAME
pfmake \- generate a profile from a multiple sequence alignment 
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Synopsis section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH SYNOPSIS
.TP 10
.B pfmake
[
.B \-0123abcehlms
] [
.B \-E
.I gap_extend
] [
.B \-F
.I score_multiplier
] [
.B \-G
.I gap_open
] [
.B \-H
.I high_init/term
] [
.B \-I
.I gap_increment
] [
.B \-L
.I low_init/term
] [
.B \-M
.I gap_multiplier
] [
.B \-S
.I matrix_multiplier
] [
.B \-T
.I gap_region
] [
.B \-X
.I gap_excision
] [
.I ms_file
|
.B \-
]
.I score_matrix
[
.I profile
] [
.I parameters
]
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Description section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pfmake
generates a
.SM PROSITE
profile from a multiple sequence alignment using methods
described by Gribskov
.IR "et al" .
(1990), Luethy
.IR "et al" .
(1994), and Thompson
.IR "et al" .
(1994), with modifications to exploit the features of the new profile format.
The file containing the multiple sequence alignment
.RI ( ms_file )
must be either in MSF format as generated by
.SM GCG
programs or by
.B readseq
(checksums are ignored) or in MSA format as created by
.BR psa2msa (1).
If
.RB ' \- '
is specified instead of a filename, the multiple sequence alignment is read
from the standard input. The
.I score_matrix
file must also be in
.SM GCG
format. 
.PP
If an already existing
.I profile
is given as input via the third optional argument, the parameters of the
DISJOINT, NORMALIZATION and CUT_OFF blocks will be read from input, all other
profile parameters will be recalculated.
Header and footer lines outside the matrix block will also be transferred 
from input to output.
.PP
If no input profile is given, the disjointness definition will be set to
PROTECT with borders leaving short unprotected tails (maximum 5 positions)
at the beginning and at the end of the profile. Furthermore, one normalization mode  
.RI ( n_score \ =\  raw_score \ /\  F ,
where
.I F
is the output score multiplier,
.I see
below), and two cut-off values (level 0: 8.5, level -1: 6.5) 
will be defined.   
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Options section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH OPTIONS 
.\" --- ms_file ---
.TP
.I ms_file
Input multiple sequence alignment.
.br
The content of the file must be either in MSF or in MSA format.
If the filename is replaced by a
.RB ' \- ',
.B pfmake
will read the input alignment from
.BR stdin .
.\" --- score_matrix ---
.TP
.I score_matrix
Residue score matrix file.
.br
Contains the substitution scores for all pairs of residues
of the sequence alphabet. The file must be in
.SM GCG
format.
.\" --- profile ---
.TP
.I profile
Optional profile file.
.br
If a filename is specified, the profile will be parsed and
those parameters mentioned in the
.I description
section will be kept for the computation of the output profile.
.\" --- 0 ---
.TP
.B \-0
Global alignment mode.
.br
Initiation (termination) at low cost
is possible only if the alignment starts at the beginning (end) of the 
profile and at the beginning (end) of the sequence.
.\" --- 1 ---
.TP
.B \-1
Domain global alignment mode.
.br
Initiation (termination) at low cost
is possible only at the beginning (end) of the profile; it may
start and end at any position within the sequence. 
.\" --- 2 ---
.TP
.B \-2
Semi-global alignment mode.
.br
Initiation (termination) at low cost
is possible if the alignment starts either at the beginning (end) of the 
profile or at the beginning (end) of the sequences.
.br
This is the default alignment mode.
.\" --- 3 ---
.TP
.B \-3
Local alignment mode.
.br
Initiation (termination) at low cost
is possible anywhere. The high-cost initiation/termination score
(parameter 
.IR H )
is meaningless. 
.\" --- a ---
.TP
.B \-a
Causes
.B pfsearch
to weight gaps asymmetrically, as in Gribskov
.IR "et al" .
(1990).
.\" --- b ---
.TP
.B \-b
Block profile mode.
.br
By imposing additional constraints on the placement of
insertions and deletions, this mode produces profiles that favor alignments
with insertions and deletions positioned symmetrically around a few 
positions. For each gap region a gap center is defined which
usually corresponds to the place where gap excision has been applied
(see parameter 
.IR X ).
If no gap excision has been applied, the position is chosen such as to 
maximize the sum of deletion opening events before, and  
deletion closing events after the gap center.
Within a given gap region
reduced deletion opening penalties are offered only before,
reduced deletion closing penalties only after,
and reduced insertion penalties only at the center.
.br
This option is incompatible with options 
.B \-a
and
.B \-e
and 
automatically disables them.
.\" --- c ---
.TP
.B \-c
Circular profile.
.br
The topology of the profile is declared as 
circular. The first and the last insert positions are merged 
by retaining the higher value of each parameter type. 
.\" --- e ---
.TP
.B \-e
Enables endgap-weighting mode as implemented in the
.SM GCG
program
.BR ProfileMake .
Endgaps in the multiple sequence alignment will be interpreted
as deletions relative to the other sequences and thus be
considered for the delineation of gap regions. 
The default is no endgap weighting as introduced by Thompson
.IR "et al" .
(1994) in the program
.BR ProfileWeight .
.\" --- h ---
.TP
.B \-h
Display usage help text.
.\" --- l ---
.TP
.B \-l
Remove output line length limit. Individual lines of the output profile
can exceed a length of 132 characters, removing the need to wrap them over several lines. 
.\" --- m ---
.TP
.B \-m
Input multiple sequence alignment is in MSA format.
.\" --- s ---
.TP
.B \-s
Causes
.B pfsearch
to weight gaps symmetrically (default mode). The
initial gap opening scores 
.RI ( MD , \ MI )
computed from the 
maximal gap length and the command-line parameters 
.IR E , \ G , \ I ,
and 
.IR M ,
will be divided by two and the resulting value will be assigned to both 
gap opening and gap closing scores 
.RI ( MI , \ IM , \ MD , \ DM ).
.\" --- E ---
.TP
.BI \-E\  gap_extend
Gap extension penalty.
.I See
Gribskov
.IR "et al" .
(1990).
.br
Default: 0.2 (appropriate for 1/3 bit-scaled blosum45 matrix)  
.\" --- F ---
.TP
.BI \-F\  score_multiplier
Output score multiplier.
.br
On output, all profile scores are multiplied by
this factor and rounded to nearest integers.
.br
Default: 100
.\" --- G ---
.TP
.BI \-G\  gap_open
Gap opening penalty.
.I See
Gribskov
.IR "et al" .
(1990).
.br
Default: 2.1 (appropriate for 1/3 bit-scaled blosum45 matrix)  
.\" --- H ---
.TP
.BI \-H\  high_init/term
High-cost initiation/termination score.
.br
This score will be applied to
all external and internal initiation and termination scores corresponding
to path matrix positions where initiation or termination at low cost is not
possible according to the alignment mode specified.
.br
Default: * (low-value)
.\" --- I ---
.TP
.BI \-I\  gap_increment
Gap penalty multiplier increment.
.I See
Gribskov
.IR "et al" .
(1990).
.br 
Default: 0.1
.\" --- L ---
.TP
.BI \-L\  low_init/term
Low-cost initiation/termination score.
.br
This score will be applied to all external and internal initiation and 
termination scores corresponding to path matrix positions where  
initiation or termination at low cost is possible according to the alignment
mode specified.
.br
Default: 0
.\" --- M ---
.TP
.BI \-M\  gap_multiplier
Maximum gap penalty multiplier.
.I See
Gribskov
.IR "et al" .
(1990). 
Default: 0.333
.\" --- S ---
.TP
.BI \-S\  matrix_multiplier
Score matrix multiplier.
.br
On input, the numbers of the score matrix are multiplied by this factor.
.br
Default: 0.1  
.\" --- T ---
.TP
.BI \-T\  gap_region
Gap region threshold.
.br
This is the minimal fraction of gap characters a column of the multiple sequence
alignment must contain in order to be considered part of a gap region.
.br
Default: 0.01
.\" --- X ---
.TP
.BI \-X\  gap_excision
Gap excision threshold.
.br
This is the minimal fraction of non-gap characters a column of the multiple sequence
alignment must contain in order to be converted into a match position. The 
.I IM
and 
.I MI 
transition scores of insert positions corresponding to excised columns
are set to zero; the other parameters remain unchanged.
.br
Default: 0.5
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Parameters section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH PARAMETERS 
.TP
Note:
for backwards compatibility, release 2.3 of the
.B pftools
package will parse the version 2.2 style parameters, but these are
.I deprecated
and the corresponding option (refer to the
.I options
section) should be used instead.
.TP
E=#
Gap extension penalty.
.br
Use option
.B \-E
instead.
.TP
F=#
Output score multiplier.
.br
Use option
.B \-F
instead.
.TP
G=#
Gap opening penalty
.br
Use option
.B \-G
instead.
.TP
H=#
High cost initiation/termination score.
.br
Use option
.B \-H
instead.
.TP
I=#
Gap penalty multiplier increment.
.br
Use option
.B \-I
instead.
.TP
L=#
Low cost initiation/termination score.
.br
Use option
.B \-L
instead.
.TP
M=#
maximum gap penalty multiplier.
.br
Use option
.B \-M
instead.
.TP
S=#
Score matrix multiplier.
.br
Use option
.B \-S
instead.
.TP
T=#
Gap region threshold.
.br
Use option
.B \-T
instead.
.TP
X=#
Gap excision threshold.
.br
Use option
.B \-X
instead.
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Examples section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
(1)
.B pfmake
\-b1 \-H 0.6 sh3.msf blosum45.cmp > sh3_block.prf    
.IP
Generates a domain-global block profile from a multiple alignment
of SH3 domains using the blosum45 matrix. 
The file
.RI ' sh3.msf '
contains a multiple alignment of 20 SH3 domains from
.SM SWISS-PROT
release 32 including sequence weights. 
The file
.RI ' blosum45.cmp '
contains a 1/3 bits-scaled blosum45 matrix in
.SM GCG
format.
.br
Note that fragment matches (alignments to parts of the profile) are not 
prohibited but penalized by the option 
.B \-H
.IR 0.6 . 
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Exit code section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH EXIT CODE
.LP
On successful completion of its task,
.B pfmake
will return an exit code of 0. If an error occurs, a diagnostic message will be
output on standard error and the exit code will be different from 0. When conflicting
options where passed to the program but the task could nevertheless be completed, warnings
will be issued on standard error.
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" References section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH REFERENCES
.LP
Bucher P, Karplus K, Moeri N & Hofmann, K. (1996).
.I A flexible motif search
.I technique based on generalized
.I profiles.
Comput. Chem. 
.BR 20 :3-24.
.LP
Gribskov M, Luethy R & Eisenberg D (1990).
.I Profile analysis. 
Meth. Enzymol.
.BR 183 :146-159.
.LP
Luethy R, Xenarios I & Bucher P (1994).
.I Improving the sensitivity of the
.I sequence profile method.
Prot. Sci. 
.BR 3 :139-146.
.LP
Thompson JD, Higgins DG & Gibson TJ (1994)
.I Improved sensitivity of profile
.I searches through the 
.I use of sequence weights
.I and gap excision.  
Comput. Appl. Biosci.  
.BR 10 :19-29.
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" See also section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR pfsearch (1),
.BR pfscan (1),
.BR psa2msa (1),
.BR psa (5),
.BR xpsa (5)
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Author section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH AUTHOR
The
.B pftools
package was developed by Philipp Bucher.
.br
Any comments or suggestions should be addressed to <pftools@sib.swiss>.
