.\"
.\" $Id: ptoh.1,v 1.1 2003/05/12 11:50:03 vflegel Exp $
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics <pftools@sib.swiss>
.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii <name>
.\" for ascii output or
.\" groff -man -Tps <name>
.\" for postscript output
.\"
.TH PTOH 1 "April 2003" "pftools 2.3" "pftools"
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Name section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH NAME
ptoh \- converts a
.SM PROSITE
formatted profile into an approximately equivalent HMM
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Synopsis section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH SYNOPSIS
.TP 10
.B ptoh
[
.B \-fFhs
] [
.B \-D
.I del_to_del
] [
.B \-I
.I ins_to_ins
] [
.B \-L
.I log_base
] [
.I profile
|
.B \-
] [
.I random_model
] [
.I parameters
]
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Description section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ptoh
converts a
.SM PROSITE
formatted generalized profile into an approximately equivalent
.SM HMMER1
(default) or
.SM SAM 
formatted hidden Markov model (HMM).
The file
.RI ' profile '
is a nucleic acid or protein profile in
.SM PROSITE
format. If
.RB ' \- '
is specified instead of a filename, the profile is read from the standard input.
The
.RI random_model
file contains a simple null-model in the format used by the HMM search programs
of the
.SM HMMER1
package.
The result is written to the standard output.
.LP
The profile-to-HMM conversion method is described in Bucher
.I et al.
(1996). 
All profile scores corresponding to transitions which are not supported
by the HMM architectures of the
.SM SAM
and
.SM HMMER1
packages, are ignored. 
If no random model is specified on the command line, 
the null model given in the GENERAL_SPEC data block of the profile is used. 
If this is also missing, a flat residue distribution
is assumed.
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Options section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH OPTIONS 
.\" --- profile ---
.TP
.I profile
Input
.SM PROSITE
generalized profile.
The motif described by the profile will be converted into an approximately
equivalent HMM. If the filename is replaced by a
.RB ' \- ',
.B ptoh
will read the input profile from
.BR stdin .
.\" --- random_model ---
.TP
.I random_model
Input random model file.
.br
This file should contain a simple null-model using the same residue alphabet as
the
.IR profile .
.\" --- f ---
.TP
.B \-f
Generate free insert-modules (FIMs) at the beginning
and at the end of the model which approximately emulate domain-global
or semi-global alignment mode 
.RI ( see
Bucher
.I et al.
1996).
.\" --- F ---
.TP
.B \-F
Generate free insert-modules (FIMs) at the beginning
and at the end of the model which approximately emulate 
local alignment mode. 
.\" --- h ---
.TP
.B \-h
Display usage help text.
.RS
.TP
Note:
The meaning of this option has changed between version 2.2 and the current
release of the
.B pftools
package. No option is needed to get
.SM HMMER1
output format because it is the default
.RI ( see
option
.BR \-s ).
.RE
.\" --- s ---
.TP 
.B \-s
Output in
.SM SAM
format.
.\" --- D ---
.TP
.BI \-D\  del_to_del
Delete-to-delete transition probabilities.
.br
They are used in conjunction with FIMs (options 
.BR \-f ,
.BR \-F ).
This value will be imposed on all delete-to-delete transitions of the model.
The other outgoing transitions from the affected delete states will be renormalized to satisfy
the "sum to one" requirement. 
Note that the application of the 
.I D
parameter precedes the application of the
.I I
parameter.
Delete-to-delete probabilities at the beginning and at the end of the
model may thus change again as a result of renormalizations  
following the application of the  
.I I
parameter.
.br
Default: 0.9
.\" --- I ---
.TP
.BI \-I\  ins_to_ins
Insert-to-insert transition probabilities.
.br
They are used in the FIMs (options 
.BR \-f ,
.BR \-F ).
This value will be imposed on the first and the last match-to-insert and insert-to-insert 
transition probabilities of the model. 
The other outgoing transitions of the affected states 
will be renormalized such as to satisfy the "summing to one" requirement.
If the 
.B \-F 
option is simultaneously set, the
.I I
parameter will also be imposed on the insert-to-delete transition probability
at the beginning, and on the delete-to-insert transition probability at the 
end of the model.
.br
Default: 0.99
.\" --- L ---
.TP
.BI \-L\  log_base
Logarithmic base.
.br
Specifies the logarithmic base used for conversion of the profile scores into HMM probabilities
(The profile scores are interpreted as log-odds ratios,
.I see
Bucher
.I et al.
1996). This value over-writes the logarithmic base 
specified within the profile by the optional 
.I LOG_BASE
parameter.
.br
Default: 1.0233739 (1/30 bit units)
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Parameters section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH PARAMETERS 
.TP
Note:
for backwards compatibility, release 2.3 of the
.B pftools
package will parse the version 2.2 style parameters, but these are
.I deprecated
and the corresponding option (refer to the
.I options
section) should be used instead.
.TP
D=#
Delete-to-delete transition probabilities.
.br
Use option
.B \-D
instead.
.TP
I=#
Insert-to-insert transition probabilities.
.br
Use option
.B \-I
instead.
.TP
L=#
Logarithmic base.
.br
Use option
.B \-L
instead.
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Examples section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
(1)
.B ptoh
\-Fs \-L 1.0233739 sh3.prf standard.random > sh3.hmm
.IP
Generates a
.SM SAM
formatted HMM for the SH3 domain from a profile. The file
.RI ' sh3.prf '
contains the source profile in
.SM PROSITE
format.
The file
.RI ' standard.random '
contains the null-model used for conversion of the log-odds ratios into probabilities.
The logarithmic base 1.0233739 corresponds to 1/30 bits, the implicit scale
of the profile.
The 
.B \-F 
option causes the HMM to emulate local alignment (fragment search) mode.
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Exit code section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH EXIT CODE
.LP
On successful completion of its task,
.B ptoh
will return an exit code of 0. If an error occurs, a diagnostic message will be
output on standard error and the exit code will be different from 0. When conflicting
options where passed to the program but the task could nevertheless be completed, warnings
will be issued on standard error.
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" References section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH REFERENCES
.LP
Bucher P, Karplus K, Moeri N & Hofmann, K. (1996).
.I A flexible motif search
.I technique based on generalized
.I profiles.
Comput. Chem.
.BR 20 :3-24.
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Author section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH AUTHOR
The
.B pftools
package was developed by Philipp Bucher.
.br
Any comments or suggestions should be addressed to <pftools@sib.swiss>.
