.\"
.\" $Id: xpsa.5,v 1.5 2003/08/11 12:09:14 vflegel Exp $
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics <pftools@sib.swiss>
.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii <name>
.\" for ascii output or
.\" groff -man -Tps <name>
.\" for postscript output
.\"
.TH XPSA 5 "July 2003" "pftools 2.3" "File formats"
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Name section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH NAME
xpsa \- extended psa header
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Description section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B xpsa
is an extension of the
.BR psa (5)
file format used by the
.B pftools
package to describe and store biological sequences.
.PP
.B xpsa
uses
.IR keyword = value
pairs in the header to include information about the sequence or the alignment
between the sequence and a
.I PROSITE
profile (or any other kind of motif). The syntax is therefore easily extensible. In this man-page, we focus on 
the keywords defined and used by the
.B pftools
package. 
.PP
In the following text we will use the more general term
.RI ' motif '
when in fact our discussion refers specifically to
.IR "PROSITE profiles" .
Nevertheless the keywords defined here can be used by any kind of sequence analysis tool
to store and transfer information.
.PP
None of the defined keywords are mandatory and analysis tools have often a length limit imposed
on the header line. In order to keep the header line reasonably short and user readable,
these tools can easily remove individual
.IR keyword = value
pairs which are not important to the specific task at hand.
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Syntax section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH SYNTAX
The general syntax of the
.B xpsa
header is given below. For examples please refer to the corresponding
.I examples
section.
.PP
The biological sequence itself starts on the next line following the header and may extend over several lines.
If several sequences are contained in the same file, each must be preceded by a header line.
.PP
.sp
Syntax of the header line:
.sp
.RS
.BI > seq_id / seq_pos
{
.RI "[ "  keyword = value " | " free_text " ]" 
}
.RE
.sp
The header must start with a
.RB ' > '
followed by the fields detailed below:
.RS
.\" --- seq_id ---
.TP
.I seq_id
typically the 
.IR accession \ number\ and\  identifier
of the sequence.  This text field should not contain any spaces.
.TP
Note:
If the input sequences have a well defined accession number and identifier (as is
the case with
.SM SWISS-PROT
entries)
.BR pfsearch "(1) and " pfscan (1)
will use as
.IR seq_id
the accession number separated by a
.RB ' | '
from the identifier.
.br
If the input sequences are in
.SM FASTA
format, no guess can be made about the accession number or the identifier. Therefore
.BR pfsearch "(1) and " pfscan (1)
will use as
.IR seq_id
all text following the
.RB ' > '
character up to the first whitespace.
.\" --- seq_pos ---
.TP
.I seq_pos
this field describes the sequence coordinates where a
motif matches. The positions are generally given as
.IR start_pos \- end_pos
pairs.
.br
If present, this field is separated from the
.I seq_id
by a
.RB ' / '
character.
.\" --- keyword=value ---
.TP
.IR keyword = value
is an optional list of defined 
.IR keyword = value
pairs. Each pair should be separated from the next or from free text by whitespaces.
.br
The
.I keyword
is case sensitive in the current implementation of the
.B pftools
package. It should not exceed 24 characters in length.
.br
The
.I value
can be numeric or alphanumeric. Values containing whitespaces should be enclosed in either
.I single quotes
or
.IR "double quotes" .
If the same type of quote appears inside the value it must be escaped using the
.RB ' \(rs '
character.
.RS
.TP
Note:
the
.B pftools
do not currently produce quote enclosed values.
.RE
.\" --- free_text ---
.TP
.I free_text
typically this is a description of the sequence. It should not contain any of the defined
.IR keyword = value
pairs.
.PP
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Keywords subsection
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SS Keywords
.RE
Keywords used by the
.BR pfsearch "(1) and " pfscan (1)
programs:
.RS
.\" --- level ---
.TP
.I level
the highest cut-off level (as a value) exceeded by the alignment.
.br
The characters
.RB ' NA '
indicate that the alignment score does not exceed any of the cut-off levels defined in the motif.
.\" --- level_tag ---
.TP
.I level_tag
the highest cut-off level (as a character string) exceeded by the alignment.
.br
The characters
.RB ' NA '
indicate that the alignment score does not exceed any of the cut-off levels defined in the motif.
.RS
.TP
Note:
.BR pfsearch "(1) and " pfscan (1)
only report the first 2 characters of the level text string.
.RE
.\" --- match_nb ---
.TP
.I match_nb
if the motif matches several times on the same sequence, each alignment is numbered incrementally.
.br
If the motif is circular, each single repeat is numbered incrementally with the key 
.I repeat_nb
(see below).
.\" --- match_parent ---
.TP
.I match_parent
for each single match of a circular motif, this key references the number of the parental total match of the circular
motif.
.RS
.TP
Note:
if a circular motif matches only once on a given sequence,
.BR pfsearch "(1) and " pfscan (1)
do not report this key.
.RE
.\" --- match_type ---
.TP
.I match_type
identifies the type of match. Either
.B region
for a complete match of a motif to a sequence, or
.B repeat
for a single repeat of a circular motif.
.\" --- motif ---
.TP
.I motif
the name and/or identifier of the motif.
.\" --- motif_start ---
.TP
.I motif_start
the motif position where the alignment begins.
.\" --- motif_end ---
.TP
.I motif_end
negative offset from the end of the alignment to the end of the motif.
.\" --- norm_score ---
.TP
.I norm_score
the normalized score of the alignment.
.\" --- raw_score ---
.TP
.I raw_score
the raw score of the alignment.
.\" --- repeat_nb ---
.TP
.I repeat_nb
if the motif is circular, each individual repeat is numbered incrementally with this keyword.
.\" --- seq_end ---
.TP
.I seq_end
negative offset from the end of the alignment to the end of the sequence.
.br
In combination with the information given by 
.I seq_pos
this allows to deduce the length of the query sequence.
.\" --- strand ---
.TP
.I strand
the sequence strand on which the motif matches, when the search includes the reverse complement of a DNA sequence.
The
.I value
is either
.B s
for the sens or
.B r
for the reverse strand.
.PP
.RE
Keywords used by the
.BR pfmake "(1) and " pfw (1)
programs:
.RS
.\" --- weight ---
.TP
.I weight
the weight of a given sequence in a multiple alignment.
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Examples section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
(1)
>O00628|PEX7/73-315
.IR motif =PS50294|WD_REP
.IR raw_score =1336
.IR match_nb =1
.IR match_type =region
.IR seq_end =-491 
.br
VTW[...]IYD
.br
>O00628|PEX7/540-801
.IR motif =PS50294|WD_REP
.IR raw_score =1378
.IR match_nb =2
.IR match_type =region
.IR seq_end =-5 
.br
SFD[...]PAS
.br

The 2 headers above describe 2 matches of the motif called
.RI ' WD_REP '
onto the sequence
.RI ' PEX7 '.
Each of the matches onto this single sequence is numbered using the the
.I match_nb
keyword.
These matches are not individual repeats of a circular motif as can be seen with the
.I region
value of the
.I match_type
keyword.
.br
The first match starts at position 73 of the sequence and ends at position 315. This position is 491
residues away from the end of the input sequence
.RI ( seq_end ).
.br
The next line following the
.BR xpsa (5)
header line is the sequence of the match (it has been truncated here to help readability).
.br
The second match begins at position 540 of the sequence and terminates 5 residues before the end of the
input sequence, that is at position 801.  
.RE

.TP
(2)
>O00628|PEX7/540-582
.IR motif =PS50294|WD_REP
.IR norm_score =7.437
.IR raw_score =180
.IR match_parent =2
.IR repeat_nb =1
.IR match_type =repeat
.IR level =-1
.IR seq_end =-224
.IR motif_start =1
.IR motif_end =-1 
.br
SFD[...]PLQ
.br

This example illustrates the kind of header obtained when aligning a circular motif
to a sequence. Each match of this motif (which we will call
.I total
match) can be composed of several individual repeats of the motif. Tools like
.BR pfsearch "(1) and " pfscan (1)
can output each total match followed by all its individual repeats. In this example
we only show one of the indiviual repeats that is part of a total match between a circular profile
and a sequence.
.br
The
.BR xpsa (5)
header above describes a single repeat of a match between a circular motif called 
.RI ' WD_REP '
and the sequence
.RI ' PEX7 '.
.br
This is the first individual repeat of a match of the circular motif, as identified by the
.I repeat_nb
keyword. The other individual repeats have not been listed in this example.
.br
The total circular motif has at least 2 distinct matches on the
.RI ' PEX7 '
sequence, because this single repeat is part of the second match as described by the
.I match_parent
keyword. The parental matches have been omitted from this example, they would be numbered using the
.I match_nb
keyword.
.br
The normalized score of this motif exceeds the cut-off level number -1 
.RI ( level
keyword) which is specified in the motif.
.br
This match starts at position 1 of the profile
.RI ( motif_start )
and position 540 of the sequence, it ends at the end of the motif
.RI ( motif_end =-1)
and position 582 of the sequence.
.br
The next line following the
.BR xpsa (5)
header line is the sequence of the match (it has been truncated here to help readability).
.RE
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" See also section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR psa (5),
.BR pfsearch (1),
.BR pfscan (1),
.BR pfw (1),
.BR pfmake (1),
.BR psa2msa (1)
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.\" Author section
.\" ------------------------------------------------
.SH "AUTHOR"
This manual page was originally written by Volker Flegel.
.br
The
.B pftools
package was developed by Philipp Bucher.
.br
Any comments or suggestions should be addressed to <pftools@sib.swiss>.

